---
layout: post
title: Italy, Day 3, Roma
category: travel
comments: false
published: true
photo: rome-enoteca-scooter.jpg
---

Monday starts with us heading to the Vatican again, this time with reservations
for the museum and Sistine Chapel.  We take the subway this time since the Roma
Passes we bought yesterday include unlimited access to the city transit system.
It's remarkable how much Rome reminds me of New York.

<!-- break -->
The Vatican museum is a visual onslaught.  Everything is on a massive scale.
Frescoes and tapestries cover entire walls, over 20 feet tall.  Even the
rooms that house these treasures are ornate.  There's not a single flat ceiling
that I noticed in the entire place.  We eventually make our way to Stanze of
Raphael.  These four rooms were frescoed by Raphael and his students, and mark
the beginning of the high Renaissance.  There is just so much to see in these
rooms, I feel like I could spend all day here, and still not see it all.

We enter the Sistine Chapel through a door on the altar side of the Chapel.  The
room is packed with people straining their necks looking up.  We nudge our way
through the crowds, down the steps of the alter, until we are just about in the
center of the chapel.  We both look up and it's awe-inspiring.  All of the
different panels, the corners and spaces between the large panels, absolutely
everything is gorgeous.  The three-dimensional quality of the figures definitely
show the work of a painter who was undoubtedly a sculptor first and foremost.
Monique and I stand in that same spot for a half hour.  We're listening to an
audio guide I had downloaded onto my phone, and making our way through every
detail of the ceiling.  When the tour turns our gaze to the wall behind the
altar, our necks are ready for a break.  This fresco is equally impressive, but
certainly shows a different mood, but the same masterful hand.  The dipiction of
Christ shows a powerful and classically built figure.  The numerous figures are
all twisted into various poses, showing just how well Michelangelo understood
the human body.  Eventually we must move on, but not after taking one last look.
We take a short cut out a side door of the chapel to bypass the crowds and end
up near the line for the cupola.

<figure class="expand">
  <img src="/img/photos/content/rome-enoteca-scooter.jpg" alt="Parked motor scooter, on a brick-paved side street, in front of a perfectly eroded building."/>
  <figcaption>Parked motor scooter, on a brick-paved side street, in front of a perfectly eroded building.</figcaption>
</figure>

At an enoteca, on a sleepy side street just off of another, less sleepy side
street, we're on our second glasses of wine.  The street seems just barely wide
enough for a single car to pass, and the enoteca has taken up almost half the
width for its outdoor tables.  On the opposite side of the street is a single
parked motor scooter, with a beautifully eroded wall behind it.  Everything
around us seems to have the perfect amount of weathering and distress, the type
of aesthetic that designers in America desparately try to achieve with "faux
finishing" techniques. 

Three people sit down at the table next to us. The waiter approaches the table
and discusses some of the menu with them.  He tells one lady, "We can do the
insalata greco without the feta and only mozzarella."  His italian accent is
very strong, and he stresses the _e_ in both gr_e_co and f_e_ta.

Meanwhile, an elderly man is walking down the uneven, brick-paved street towards
us.  He moves slowly and deliberately, leaning on his cane with every step.  He
passes alongside the waiter, the waiter's back towards the street.  At the
precise moment when the waiter says "without feta", the old man stops in his
tracks.  He slowly turns his head, staring intently at the back of the waiter's
head.  He stands there, with furled brow, as stiff as any marble statue in Rome,
until the waiter has finished taking the order.  When he finally breaks his
stare, he starts back down the street, as slowly and deliberately as ever.  He
ever so slightly shakes his head, while murmuring something under his breath.

